1



1. The development from central part of the body towards peripheries or extremities denotes the–
Pradyut

(a) principles of radiated development

(b) principles of decentralized development

(c) principles of Proximodistal development
(d) principles of cascade development
2. School is an institution of socialization of children where–
(a) schoolchildren occupy the central position
(b) school routines occupy the ventral position
(c) school activities occupy the central position
(d) schoolteachers occupy the central position
3. If you join a teacher fraternity and chose to dress like most of the others in your group, you are exhibiting–
(a) group identity
(b) obedience
(c) compliance
(d) conformity
Q4. The concept of object permanence is attained during Piaget’s _____ stage of development.
(a) sensorimotor
(b) preoperational
(c) concrete operational
(d) formal operational
Q5. Individualized Education Programme is planned from the perspective of –
(a) Special Education Programme
(b) Child-centered Education Programme
(c) Open School Education Programme
(d) e-Learning Education Programme
Q6. Between _____ months of age, most children begin to combine words into short sentences while speaking.
(a) 12 and 1
(b) 18 and 24
(c) 24 and 30
2 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) 30 and 36
Q7. The concept of Intelligence Quotient or IQ was developed by–
(a) Galton
(b) Binet
(c) Stern
(d) Terman
Q8. Creativity is through to be related to the concept of –
(a) fluid intelligence
(b) crystallized intelligence
(c) convergent thinking
(d) divergent thinking
Q9. The acceptable sound combinations of a language are specified in its _____
(a) phonological
(b) grammatical
(c) syntactic
(d) inflection
Q10. The position where thought patterns are influenced by language is called–
(a) cultural tendency
(b) linguistic determination
(c) cognitive bias
(d) sociolinguistic genesis
Q11. Ravi repairs appliances by testing hypothesis about the cause of the malfunction based on his experiences with the symptoms. He uses–
(a) insight
(b) algorithms
(c) mental set
(d) heuristics
Q12. Divya often divides the assigned job into small tasks which she can handle easily. She is using–
(a) reductionisms
(b) secondary elaboration
(c) subgoal analysis
(d) functional fixedness
Q13. “Society determines the roles of male and female.” This statement articulates–
(a) gender as an inherent construct
(b) gender as a hereditary endowment
(c) gender as an intuitive construct
3 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) gender as a social construct
Q14. Grading, coding, marking and credit accumulation systems are some of the examples of–
(a) evaluation procedure of answer sheets of the examination
(b) symbolizing position of children in the class
(c) depicting the academic progress in report card
(d) scoring procedure of assessment of learners’ achievement
Q15. Assessment of learners’ achievement helps the teachers to–
(a) maintain the performance record of learners
(b) evaluate the effectiveness of pedagogy
(c) make ability grouping of learners in the classrooms
(d) prepare activity log for teaching
Q16. Inclusive Education is based on the principle of–
(a) social equilibrium
(b) equity and equal opportunities
(c) social existence and globalization
(d) world brotherhood
Q17. The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act has been enacted in the year–
(a) 1992
(b) 1995
(c) 1999
(d) 2016
Q18. Children with individual differences should be taught in a school having teachers–
(a) to teach in different sections of classrooms based on their individual differences
(b) trained to use different pedagogy to meet their diverse learning needs
(c) trained to teach children with specific individual differences
(d) trained to make them homogeneous learners
Q19. The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 ensures the righs of children with disabilities to free education from–
(a) 6 years to 18 years
(b) 3 years to 18 years
(c) 6 years to 14 years
(d) 6 years to 22 years
Q20. Providing teaching-learning materials in accessible formats to the diverse learners implies–
(a) Universal Inclusive Education Ethical Considerate
(b) Universal Code of Teaching Practices
(c) Universal Humanistic Approach of Teaching
4 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) Universal Design of Learning
Q21. ________ involves self-awareness and control of cognitive abilities, e.g., planning, reviewing and revising, etc.
(a) Centration
(b) Metacognition
(c) Cognition
(d) Accommodation
Q22. When children think to interpret the received information according to their experiences, it is called–
(a) reflective thinking
(b) creative thinking
(c) abstract thinking
(d) concrete thinking
Q23. Teaching learners at varying levels of difficulty based on the ability of individual learner is known as–
(a) differentiated instruction
(b) selective instruction
(c) precision teaching
(d) errorless instruction
Q24. Maintenance is the specific stage of learning which is antecedent to _____ stage of learning.
(a) acquisition
(b) motivation
(c) independent
(d) generalization
Q25. Zajonc believes that cognition and emotion are–
(a) interdependent
(b) independent
(c) interrelated
(d) integrated
Q26. A teacher is teaching children by demonstration of a task to correct the performances of an already learned task. He is using ______ method of teaching.
(a) imitation
(b) observation
(c) correction
5 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) modelling
Q27. According to Mann and Janis, decision maker children analyze the problem, list the alternatives and weigh each option for its advantages and disadvantages. His behavior reflects–
(a) surveillance
(b) vigilant
(c) outgoing
(d) autocratic
Q28. In _____ thinking, a child as a problem solver evaluates the truth or likelihood of statements.
(a) creative
(b) aesthetic
(c) abstract
(d) logical
Q29. The task in which the children get experience while enjoying themselves is known as–
(a) drill and practice task
(b) consumer type task
(c) producer type task
(d) problem type task
Q30. Multisensory approach in teaching-learning is the simultaneous use of visual, auditory, tactile and _____ senses to enhance learning.
(a) kinesthetic
(b) vestibular
(c) perceptual
(d) observational
PART – II (Mathematics)
Directions: Answer the following questions by selecting the correct/most appropriate options.
Q31. In a meeting,425 of the members were female. What percent of the members was this?
(a) 40%
(b) 24%
(c) 16%
(d) 4%
Q32. A shop reduced its prices by 10%. What is the new price of an item which was previously sold for Rs. 500?
(a) Rs. 510
(b) Rs. 550
(c) Rs. 450
6 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) Rs. 400
Q33. Given below is a data set of temperatures (in °C):
–6, –8, –2, 3, 2, 0, 5, 4, 8
What is the range of the data?
(a) 0 °C
(b) 16 °C
(c) 18 °C
(d) 10 °C
Q34. A coin is tossed 10 times and the outcomes are observed as :
H, T, H, T, T, H, H, T, H, H
(H is Head; T is Tail)
What is the probability of getting Head?
(a) 35
(b) 45
(c) 25
(d) 15
Q35. The numerical expression 37+(–7)8=2556 shows that–
(a) rational numbers are closed under addition
(b) rational numbers are closed under subtraction
(c) rational numbers are closed under multiplication
(d) rational numbers are closed under division
Q36. Which one of the following 3D shapes does not have a vertex?
(a) Pyramid
(b) Prism
(c) Cone
(d) Sphere
Q37. If (57)4×(57)−3=(57)5𝑥−2, then x is–
(a) 15
(b) 25
(c) 35
(d) 45
Q38. Let, a, b, c be three rational numbers, where 𝑎=35,𝑏=23,𝑐=−56. Which one of the following is true?
(a) a×(b+c)=b×(a+c)
(b) a÷(b+c)=b÷(a+c)
(c) a+(b+c)=c+(a+b)
7 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) a–(b–c)=c–(a–b)
Q39. A geometric representation, showing the relationship between a whole and its part, is–
(a) histogram
(b) pie chart
(c) bar graph
(d) pictograph
Q40. If q is the square of a natural number p, then p is–
(a) the square of q
(b) the square root of q
(c) equal to q
(d) greater than q
Q41. The value of √91+√70+√121 is–
(a) 9
(b) 10
(c) 11
(d) 12
Q42. In a park, √784 plants are arranged so that number of plants in a row is same as the number of rows. The number of plants in each row is–
(a) 18
(b) 28
(c) 38
(d) 48
Q43. If two quantities x and y vary inversely with each other, then which one of the following is true?
(a) Ratio of their corresponding values remains constant.
(b) Product of their corresponding values remains constant.
(c) Summation of their corresponding values remains constant.
(d) Difference of their corresponding values remains constant.
Q44. Given
7𝑦×6𝑦𝑦𝑦
Then the value of y is–
(a) 8
(b) 6
(c) 4
8 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) 2
Q45. To fill a rectangular tank of area 700m², 140m³ of water is required. What will be the height of the water level in the tank?
(a) 10 cm
(b) 20 cm
(c) 30 cm
(d) 40 cm
Q46. Which one of the following is the most suitable strategy to teach the skill of addition of money?
(a) Use of ICT
(b) Role play
(c) Use of models
(d) Doing lots of problems
Q47. After teaching the concept of multiplication to her class, a teacher asked her children to multiply 48 by 4.
One of her students solved it orally as “To multiply 48 by 4, we first add 48 to 48, which makes 96 and then add another 96 to reach 192. So, the answer is 192”.
(a) The child used a wrong method to multiply. He/She has to use the place value algorithm to multiply the numbers.
(b) He/She has not understood the concept of multiplication.
(c) The given problem is a multiplication problem and not addition problem.
(d) He/She understood multiplication as repeated addition.
Q48. Which one of the following should be taken up as initial activity in introducing the concept of ‘time’ to young learners?
(a) Discussing about the prior experiences with phrases related to time
(b) Teaching children how to read time in clock
(c) Teaching children how to calculate elapsed time
(d) Conversion of time in different units
Q49. Which one of the following is not the purpose of assessment?
A. Monitoring student’s growth
B. Making instructional decision
C. Evaluating the effectiveness of curriculum
D. Ranking the children based on performance
Select the correct answer using the code given below
(a) A
(b) D
(c) B
9 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) C
Q50. Which one of the following methods is most suitable for teaching mathematics at upper primary level?
(a) Demonstration method
(b) Lecture method
(c) Activity-based learning
(d) Problem-solving method
Q51. Which one of the following is most essential in learning mathematics at upper primary level?
(a) Solving a problem many times
(b) Exploring different ways of solving a problem
(c) Memorizing all formulas
(d) Copying correctly what teacher writes on the board
Q52. The strategy of questioning used in the mathematics class at upper primary level–
(a) should be discouraged as it demoralizes the child who is unable to answer
(b) makes the classroom noisy as the children would be taking too much
(c) could create stress among children and may lead them to accept the teacher’s authority
(d) helps children to express their thoughts or understanding and think critically
Q53. A teacher has taught measurement of area to class VIII children, but many of her students ae confused between the usage of different units of area and volume. What could be the reason of such a confusion in children?
(a) The children did not know the use of units for area.
(b) The children have not memorized different units.
(c) Different units have been introduced all together without relating them with their daily life.
(d) The concept to measurement of area is a difficult topic for a class VIII learner.
Q54. Which one of the following can be the most appropriate aim of encouraging mathematical communication in classroom?
(a) Children should be able to use a precise language while talking about mathematical statements and using them
(b) Children who have fear about mathematics should be able to interact in the class
(c) To organize debates in the class regarding topics of mathematics
(d) Children should be able to recite theorems and formulas in mathematics calss
Q55. The purpose of a diagnostic test in mathematics is–
(a) to know the gaps in children’s understanding
(b) to give feedback to the parents
(c) to fill the progress report
10 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) to plan he question paper for the end term examination
Q56. Remedial teaching is helpful for–
(a) teaching the whole class
(b) recapitulating the lesson
(c) teaching in play-way method
(d) removing learning difficulties of weak students
Q57. Which one of the following is not a mathematical process?
(a) Visualization
(b) Memorization
(c) Estimation
(d) Measurement
Q58. “Errors play a crucial role in learning of mathematics.” This statement is–
(a) false, because errors occur due to carelessness
(b) true, because errors reflect the thinking of child
(c) false, because mathematics is exact
(d) true, because errors provide feedback about the marks they obtained
Q59. While teaching ‘shapes’, a teacher can plan a trip to historical places, as–
A. it needs to provide leisure time as most of the syllabus has been completed in time
B. it would be an opportunity to improve communication skill
C. shapes are an integral part of every architecture and such trips encourage connections across disciplines
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) A and B
(b) C
(c) B and C
(d) A, C and D
Q60. A student was asked to calculate the surface area of a cube.
He calculated the volume.
The reason(s) of error in calculation is/are–
A. the student finds the class boring as he does not like mathematics class
B. the student is not fit to study in that class
C. the student is not able to understand the concept of surface area and volume
D. the student has understood the concept of surface area and volume
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) C
(b) B and C
(c) D
11 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) A and B
PART – III (Environmental Studies)
Directions : Answer the following questions selecting the correct/most appropriate
Q61.The longest snakes found in the world are–
(a) vipers
(b) anacondas
(c) boas
(d) reticulated pythons
Q62. Yoga is done by the people in the world because–
(a) it is a simple exercise
(b) its keeps people healthy
(c) it increases hunger
(d) it brings happiness
Q63. The vaccine for smallpox was discovered by–
(a) Ronald Ross
(b) Robert Koch
(c) Edward Jenner
(d) Alexander Fleming
Q64. Which one of the following is used as preservative?
(a) Copper sulphate
(b) Sodium benzoate
(c) Ammonium sulphate
(d) Sodium chloride
Q65. Yeast is used for the production of–
(a) alcohol
(b) curd
(c) sugar
(d) common salt
Q66. Mitochondria: ATP ∷ Ribosome :?
(a) Carbohydrate
(b) Fat
(c) Protein
(d) Vitamin
Q67. If the frequency of a simple pendulum is 2 Hz how many oscillations will it complete in 16 seconds?
(a) 8
(b) 16
(c) 32
12 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) 64
Q68. Which one of the following metals burns if kept in air?
(a) Sodium
(b) magnesium
(c) Zinc
(d) Aluminum
Q69. Magnesium hydroxide [𝑀𝑔 (𝑂𝐻)2] is used as–
(a) oxidizing agent
(b) reducing agent
(c) anti-acid
(d) fermentation agent
Q70. Which one of the following gases burns with pop sound?
(a) Oxygen
(b) Hydrogen
(c) Nitrogen dioxide
(d) Sulphur dioxide
Q71. Which of the following is/are example(s) of non-contact force?
(a) Gravitation force
(b) Muscular force
(c) Magnetic force
(d) Both (a) and (b)
Q72. Diabetes is controlled by ________ hormone.
(a) thyroxine
(b) adrenaline
(c) insulin
(d) thymosin
Q73. Which one of the following is not a product of petroleum?
(a) Kerosene
(b) CNG
(c) Paraffin wax
(d) Bitumen
Q74. Red Data Book contains a record of–
(a) endangered species
(b) extinct species
(c) flora
13 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) fauna
Q75. Why are the soles of the shoes treaded?
(a) To give the shoes more protection
(b) To decrease friction
(c) To increase friction
(d) To increase life to the shoes
Q76. Sarika took distilled water in a bottle and tried to find whether it conducts electricity or not. What is she likely to find?
(a) It is good conductor of electricity.
(b) It is an insulator.
(c) It is poor conductor of electricity.
(d) None of the above
Q77. Which one of the following statements is not correct?
(a) There is a minimum limit of current which can safely flow in the electric circuit.
(b) There is a maximum limit of current which can safely flow in the electric circuit.
(c) Fuses are inserted in electric circuits of all the buildings.
(d) If the proper fuse is inserted in a circuit, it will blow off if the current is more than the safe limit.
Q78. Which one of the following places is most likely to be affected by a cyclone?
(a) Porbandar
(b) Puri
(c) Mumbai
(d) Goa
Q79. The change in seasons on the earth occurs because–
(a) the axis of rotation of the earth is perpendicular to the plane of its orbit
(b) the axis of rotation of the earth is tilted with respect to the plane of its orbit
(c) the distance between the earth and the sun is not constant
(d) the axis of rotation of the earth is parallel to the plane of its orbit
Q80. There are two columns, Column–A and Column–B
(a)
Canopy
(i)
Dead plant and animal tissues
(b)
Decomposers
(ii)
A wild animal
(c)
Humus
(iii)
Microorganism
(d)
Porcupine
(iv)
Branches of tall tree
Which one of the following is the correct sequence of Column–B for the given sequence of Column–A?
(a) (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
(b) (i), (iii), (ii), (iv)
(c) (iii), (iv), (ii), (i)
14 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) (iv), (iii), (ii), (i)
Q81. Why is formative assessment important is science?
(a) It is easy to conduct.
(b) It helps in developing scientific temper in students.
(c) It is diagnostic.
(d) It helps in better understanding of science.
Q82. Why are science fairs organized in schools?
(a) To prepare students for higher education in science
(b) To help the students to score higher in their examination
(c) To nurture creativity and experimentation in science among students
(d) To evaluate students on the basis of their performance
Q83. As a teacher, which one of the following do you find most appropriate for scientific approach to teaching?
(a) Clarify the students about the concepts in the class
(b) Show the use of technology for teaching concepts
(c) Give projects to the students
(d) Ask the students to perform activities related to the concepts
Q84. According to NCF–2005, “good science education is true to life”. What does this mean?
(a) Science should prepare the child to the world of work.
(b) Science should be able to engage the child meaningfully.
(c) Science should enable the child in learning the processes of acquiring scientific knowledge.
(d) Science should help in living easy life.
Q85. Which one of the following is not a quality of scientific attitude?
(a) Open-mindedness
(b) Curiosity to learn more
(c) Objectivity in approach to problems
(d) Hard work
Q86. Hari wants to teach the circular motion to class VI students. Which one of the following will be the best method?
(a) Discussion
(b) Activity-based teaching
(c) Giving examples
(d) Demonstration
Q87. Which one of the following is an important aim of learning science?
(a) To get knowledge of science
(b) To collect the information of science contents
(c) To imbibe the values of honesty, integrity and cooperation among learners
15 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) To help the fellow colleagues in getting knowledge of science
Q88. The continuous and comprehensive evaluation in science means–
(a) summative and formative assessment
(b) more frequent test and examination
(c) routine activities and exercises to assess learning
(d) evaluation of all aspects of science
Q89. Which one of the following is not a step of problem-solving approach?
(a) Visualizing the situation
(b) Attempt to solve
(c) Drawing conclusion
(d) Observation
Q90. Which one of the following is a step of analogy strategy in science?
(a) Map similarities
(b) Presentation of abstraction
(c) Interlinking concepts
(d) Application
PART – III (Social Studies/ Social Science)
Directions : Answer the following questions by selecting the correct/most appropriate options.
Q31. Wind vane is used for measuring–
(a) wind velocity
(b) air pressure
(c) wind direction
(d) air temperature
Q32. Which one of the following layers of the atmosphere helps in the transmission of radio waves?
(a) Stratosphere
(b) Mesosphere
(c) Thermosphere
(d) Exosphere
Q33. Identify the various layers of the earth in order from interior to the outermost layer:
(a) Crust, mantle, outer core, inner core
(b) Mantle, crust, outer core, inner core
(c) Inner core, outer core, crust, mantle
16 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) Inner core, outer core, mantle, crust
Q34. Observe carefully the location of the sun, earth and moon in the given diagram and tell what it depicts :
(a) Solar eclipse
(b) Lunar eclipse
(c) Spring tide
(d) Neap tide
Q35. When the river enters the plain, it bends and flows forming large bends known as–
(a) levee
(b) floodplain
(c) meander
(d) oxbow lake
Q36. Which means of transport is extremely useful in most inaccessible areas and in time of calamities for rescuing people and distributing food, water, clothes and medicines?
(a) Airways
(b) Railways
(c) Roadways
(d) Waterways
Q37. The branch of geography which deals with composition of a particular human population is called–
(a) urban geography
(b) biogeography
(c) demography
(d) human geography
Q38. Assertion (A):
The sun sets in Gujarat about two hours after Arunachal Pradesh.
Reason (R):
Arunachal Pradesh is on a higher latitude than Gujarat.
Select the correct option from the given alternatives.
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) explains (A)
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) does not explain (A)
(c) (A) is true and (R) is false
17 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) (A) is false and (R) is true
Q39. Which one of the following is a non-conventional source of energy?
(a) Firewood
(b) Natural gas
(c) Solar energy
(d) Coal
Q40. The breeding of fish in specially constructed tanks and ponds is known as–
(a) sericulture
(b) viticulture
(c) horticulture
(d) pisciculture
Q41. A narrow strip of land joining two landmasses is known as–
(a) strait
(b) isthmus
(c) island
(d) bay
Q42.Which one of the following continents is smallest in size?
(a) Australia
(b) South America
(c) Africa
(d) Europe
Q43. At the upper primary stage, Social Science comprises of–
(a) History, Geography, Political Science, Psychology
(b) History, Geography, Economics, Sociology
(c) History, Geography, Political Science, Economics
(d) History, Geography, Political Science, Sociology
Q44. Inductive learning is contradictory to which one of the following approaches?
(a) Expository teaching
(b) Structure training
(c) Simulation
(d) Mastery learning
Q45. Read the given statements A and B and select the correct answer:
A. Critical thinking promotes the building of concepts, application and expansion of ideas.
B. It does not help in understanding and evaluating arguments and beliefs of others.
(a) A is true and B is false
(b) A is false and B is true
(c) Both A and B are false
18 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) Both A and B are true
Q46. What is an empirical evidence?
(a) Data gathered in the real world through the senses
(b) A numeric approach for research
(c) Data measured in metric units
(d) Data gathered using reliable methods of data collection
Q47. The models/replicas of physical features are most suitable for teaching–
(a) History
(b) Economics
(c) Geography
(d) Political Science
Q48.The collection of weather information from the local newspaper is an example of which type of source?
(a) Primary
(b) Secondary
(c) Tertiary
(d) Both primary and tertiary
Q49. In which type of classroom, the students with learning disabilities learn alongside other students?
(a) Exclusive
(b) Special
(c) Inclusive
(d) Modern
Q50. Who has given the following theory?
“All children go through the same sequence of development, but at different rates. Therefore teacher must plan activities for individual children and small groups, not just for the class as a whole.”
(a) C. L. Ogden
(b) D. Purcell
(c) J. H. Bell
(d) J. Piaget
Q51. In order to promote cooperative learning in the classroom, a teacher should–
(a) engage students in debate and discussions
(b) give them individual projects
(c) divide the class in small groups for work
(d) provide them various sources to do the project
Q52. A self-guided, self-disciplined thinking which attempts to reason at the highest level of quality in a fair-minded way is called–
(a) critical thinking
(b) complex thinking
(c) intelligent thinking
19 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) abstract thinking
Q53. The colours used in the Ajanta Caves Paintings have been derived from which of the following materials?
(a) Remains of animal organs
(b) Graphite
(c) Plants and minerals
(d) Slate
Q54. The earliest manuscripts were written on–
(a) palm leaves
(b) stones
(c) paper
(d) wood
Q55. Which one of the following periods is longest in the human history?
(a) Paleolithic
(b) Mesolithic
(c) Neolithic
(d) Megalithic
Q56. Read the given statements A and B and select the correct answer :
A. Mehrgarh is located in a fertile plain near Bolan Pass of Pakistan.
B. Evidences of farming and herding are found here.
(a) A is true and B is false
(b) A is false and B is true
(c) Both A and B are false
(d) Both A and B are true
Q57. In which one of the following Sates of India, the largest number of Harappan sites have been found?
(a) Punjab
(b) Haryana
(c) Gujarat
(d) Jammu and Kashmir
Q58. ‘Rig Veda’ was originally composed in which one of the following languages?
(a) Brahmi
(b) Pali
(c) Sanskrit
(d) Prakrit
Q59. The first ruler of Magadha Mahajanapadas in the sixth century BC was–
(a) Mahavira
(b) Prasenjit
(c) Bimbisara
20 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) Ajatashatru
Q60. Which one of the following is not among the three jewels of Buddhism?
(a) Buddha
(b) Dhamma
(c) Ahimsa
(d) Sangha
Q61. Who among the following elects the Rajya Sabha Members?
(a) Voters in Assembly Constituencies
(b) Voters in Parliamentary Constituencies
(c) Lok Sabha Members
(d) Members of Legislative Assemblies (MLAs)
Q62. Which of the following systems of government was adopted by India?
(a) Parliamentary and Unitary
(b) Presidential and Federal
(c) Presidential and Unitary
(d) Parliamentary and Federal
Q63. How many Parliamentary Constituencies are reserved for the Scheduled Castes?
(a) 48
(b) 84
(c) 47
(d) 74
Q64. Which one of the following Fundamental Rights is violated due to practice of untouchability yin India?
(a) Right to Equality
(b) Right to Freedom
(c) Right against Exploitation
(d) Right to Constitutional Remedies
Q65. As per the Constitution of India, which one of the following is not a Fundamental Right?
(a) Right to Education
(b) Right against Exploitation
(c) Right to Freedom of Religion
(d) Right to Property
Q66. Untouchability refers to the discrimination on the basis of–
(a) physical disability
(b) gender
(c) caste
21 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) race
Q67. Who appoints the Chief Minister?
(a) The President
(b) The Prime Minister
(c) The Governor
(d) The Chief Justice of the High Court
Q68. Who appoints the Governor?
(a) The Prime Minister
(b) The Chief Minister
(c) The Chief Justice of India
(d) The President
Q69. Who elects the Prime Minister?
(a) The Council of Ministers
(b) The Chief Ministers
(c) MPs
(d) MPs and MLAs
Q70. Who among the following is called the first citizen of India?
(a) The Chief Justice of India
(b) The Home Minister
(c) The President
(d) The Prime Minister
Q71. Who among the following is called the first citizen of a State in India?
(a) The Chief Justice of the High Court
(b) The Home Minister
(c) The Governor
(d) The Chief Minister
Q72. The current Lok Sabha (from 2014 onwards) is the–
(a) 13th
(b) 14th
(c) 15th
(d) 16th
Q73. Who is the current President of India?
(a) Narendra Modi
(b) Pratibha Patil
(c) M. Venkaiah Naidu
22 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) Ram Nath Kovind
Q74. Which of the following is not mentioned in the Constitution of India?
(a) Names of the States and Union Territories
(b) Structure of the Government
(c) Names of political parties
(d) Rights of the citizens
Q75. Who nominates Members to the Rajya Sabha?
(a) The President
(b) The Vice President
(c) The Prime Minister
(d) The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
Q75. Who nominates Members to the Rajya Sabha?
(a) The President
(b) The Vice President
(c) The Prime Minister
(d) The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
Q76. Who among the following was the President of the Constituent Assembly of India?
(a) C. Rajagopalachari
(b) Dr. B. R. Ambedkar
(c) Dr. Rajendra Prasad
(d) Jawaharlal Nehru
Q77. Who among the following was the only Indian Governor-General of India?
(a) Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
(b) B. Pattabhi Sataramayya
(c) T. T. Krishnamachari
(d) C. Rajagopalachari
Q78. When was the Constitution of India adopted?
(a) August 15, 1947
(b) November 26, 1947
(c) November 26, 1949
(d) January 26, 1950
Q79. Who among the following played a decisive role in integrating the Princely States of India?
(a) Jawaharlal Nehru
(b) Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
(c) Dr. B. R. Ambedkar
23 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) C. Rajagopalachari
Q80. Which of the following deal with the matters in the Concurrent List of the Constitution of India?
(a) Union Government and State Governments
(b) State Governments and Local Government Bodies
(c) Union Territories
(d) Local Government Bodies
Q81. Who among the following was the Chairman of the Drafting Committee in the Constituent Assembly of India?
(a) C. Rajagopalachari
(b) Dr. B. R. Ambedkar
(c) Dr. Rajendra Prasad
(d) Jawaharlal Nehru
Q82. In the 18th century, under whom did Bengal gradually break away from the Mughal control?
(a) Murshid Quli Khan
(b) Nadir Shah
(c) Alivardi Khan
(d) Burhan-ul-Mulk
Q83.Who among the following Governor-Generals decided that Bahadur Shah Zafar Would be the last Mughal emperor and after his death none of the descendants would be recognized as a ruler?
(a) Lord Dalhousie
(b) William Bentinck
(c) Lord Canning
(d) Lord Cornwallis
Q84. Which Governor-General declared that Awadh was being misgoverned and British rule was needed to ensure proper administration?
(a) Lord Ripon
(b) Lord Canning
(c) Lord Dalhousie
(d) Lord Mountbatten
Q85. Which ruler of Kanpur called himself ‘Peshwa’?
(a) Nana Saheb
(b) Bajirao I
(c) Bajirao II
(d) Bahadur Shah Zafar
Q86. The best methodology to teach the theme ‘Factory’ would be–
(a) to narrate a story
(b) to invite a resource person
(c) to organize a visit to an industrial plant
24 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) to screen a documentary film
Q87. What is EDUSAT?
(a) The rocket that carries man-made satellites to be placed in the orbit around the sun
(b) A newly discovered planet in the solar system
(c) An asteroid found between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter
(d) A man-made Indian Satellite
Q88. The verses and ideas of which one of the following personalities have been preserved in ‘Panchvani’ and ‘Bijak’?
(a) Mirabai
(b) Kabir
(c) Guru Nanak
(d) Ravidas
Q89. The mural painting from Ellora Caves which shows Vishnu as Narasimha, the man-lion, is a work of which period?
(a) Gurjara-Pratihara period
(b) Rashtrakuta period
(c) Chalukya period
(d) Gupta period
Q90. Which one of the following organizations believes in Upanishads?
(a) Brahma Samaj
(b) Ramakrishna Mission
(c) Satyashodhak Samaj
(d) Seva Samaj
PART—IV — Language—I
ENGLISH
IMPORTANT : Candidates should attempt questions from Part—IV (Q. Nos. 91 to 120), if they have opted for ENGLISH as Language—I only.
Directions : Read the passage carefully and answer the questions that follow (Q. Nos. 91 to 99) by selecting the correct/most appropriate options.
Born out of the forces of globalization, India’s IT sector is undertaking some globalization of its own. In search of new sources of rapid growth, the country’s outsourcing giants are aggressively ex expanding beyond their usual stomping grounds into the developing world; setting up programming centres, chasing new clients and hiring local talent. Through geographic diversification, Indian companies hope to regain some momentum after the recession. The shift is being driven by a global economy in which the US is no longer the undisputed engine of growth. India’s IT powers rose to prominence largely on the
25 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
decision made by American executives, who were quick to capitalize on the cost savings to be gained by outsourcing noncore operations, such as systems programming and call centres, to specialists overseas.
Revenues in India’ s IT sector surged from $4 billion in 1998 to $59 billion last fiscal, but with the recession NASSCOM forecasts that the growth rate of India’s exports of IT and other business services to the US and Europe will drop to at most 7% in the current fiscal year, down from 16% last year and 29% in 2007-08.
Factors other than the crisis are driving India’s IT firms into the emerging world. Although the US still accounts for 60% of the export revenue of India’s IT sector, emerging markets are growing faster. Tapping these more dynamic economies won’t be easy, however. The goal of Indian IT firms for the past 30 years has been to woo clients outside India and transfer as much of the actual work as possible back home where lower wages for highly skilled programmers allowed them to offer significant cost savings. With costs in other emerging economies equally low, Indian firms can’t complete on price alone.
To adapt, Indian companies which are relatively unknown in these emerging nation are establishing major local operations around the world, in the process hiring thousands of locals. Cultural conflicts arise at times while training new recruits. In addition, IT firms also have to work extra hard to woo business from emerging-market companies still unaccustomed to the concept of outsourcing. If successful, the future of India’s outsourcing sector could prove as bright as its past.
Q91. What is the author trying to convey through the phrase “India’s IT sector is undertaking some globalization of its own”?
(a) India has usurped America’s position as the leader in IT.
(b) The Indian IT sector is competing with other emerging nations for American business.
(c) The Indian IT sector is considering outsourcing to developing economies.
(d) Indian IT firms are engaging in expanding their presence internationally.
Q92. Which of the following factors made the services offered by the Indian IT attractive to the US?
A. Indian IT companies had expertise in rare core operations
B. The US lacked the necessary infrastructure and personnel to handle mass call centre operations
C. Inability of other equally cost-efficient developing countries to comply with their strict policies
(a) None
(b) Only A
(c) Only A and B
(d) Only C
Q93. What has caused Indian IT firms to change the way they conduct business in developing countries?
(a) The volume of work being awarded cannot be handled by Indian firms
(b) The demands of these markets are different from those of India’s traditional customers
(c) Wages demanded by local workers are far higher than what they pay their Indian employees
(d) Stringent laws which are not conducive to outsourcing
Q94. What do the NASSCOM statistics about Indian IT exports indicate?
(a) Drop in demand for IT services by Europe and the US
(b) Indian IT firms charge exorbitantly for their services
26 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(c) India has lost out to other emerging IT hubs
(d) The Indian IT sector should undergo restructuring
Q95. According to the passage, which one of the following is not a difficulty that Indian IT firms will face in emerging markets?
(a) Mindset resistant to outsourcing
(b) Local IT services are equally cost-effective
(c) The US is their preferred outsourcing destination
(d) Conflicts arising during the training of local talent
Q96. Which of the following is/are not true in the context of the passage?
A. The recession severely impacted the US but not India.
B. India is trying to depend less on the US as a source of growth.
C. The future success of Indian IT firms depends on emerging markets.
(a) Only B and C
(b) Only A
(c) Only B
(d) All A, B and C
Q97. Which one of the following words is most similar in meaning to the word ‘chasing’ as used in the passage?
(a) Running
(b) Harassing
(c) Pestering
(d) Pursuing
Q98. Which one of the following words is most opposite to the meaning of the word ‘undisputed’ as used in the passage?
(a) Challenging
(b) Doubtful
(c) Deprived
(d) Emphasized
Q99. Other than crisis, what is driving IT companies to seek other options?
(a) The US makes more than 60% of India’s export revenue
(b) Emerging markets
27 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(c) None of the above
(d) Both (a) and (b)
Directions: Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow (Q. Nos. 100 to 105) by selecting the correct/most appropriate options.
Break, Break, Break,
On thy cold gray stones, O Sea !
And I would that my tongue could utter
The thoughts that arise in me.
O, well for the fisherman’s boy,
That he shouts with his sister at play!
O, well for the sailor lad,
That he sings in his boat on the bay!
And the stately ships go on
To their haven under the hill;
But O for the touch of a vanish’d hand,
And the sound of a voice that is still!
Beak, Break, Break,
At the foot of thy crags, O Sea!
But the tender grace of a day that is dead
Will never come back to me.
Q100. What is ‘breaking’ in ‘Break, Beak, Break’?
(a) The sea
(b) Poet’s heart
(c) The wind
(d) The sunshine through the clouds
Q101. The mood of the speaker in ‘Break, Break, Break’ is–
(a) contemplative and hopeful
(b) lighthearted
(c) somber and grieved
(d) energized
Q102. The speaker in ‘Break, Break, Break’ observes all the following, except–
(a) children playing
(b) a sailor boy singing
28 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(c) a lady in a tower
(d) ships coming in
Q103. The speaker of ‘Break, Break, Break’ cannot–
(a) feel
(b) see
(c) speak
(d) hear
Q104. In the first two lines of the poem, the poet uses–
(a) simile
(b) apostrophe
(c) assonance
(d) metaphor
Q105. The phrase ‘haven under thee hill’ is an example of–
(a) simile
(b) metaphor
(c) alliteration
(d) personification
Directions : Answer the following questions (Q. Nos. 106 to 120) by selecting the correct/most appropriate options.
Q106. Which one of the following does not come under the principle of selection and gradation?
(a) Accuracy
(b) Availability
(c) Coverage
(d) Frequency
Q107. The phenomenon, where a single word is associated with two or several related meanings, is known as–
(a) homonyms
(b) homograph
(c) polysemy
(d) homonymy
Q108. “The dog lived in the garden, but cat, who was smarter, lived inside the house” is an example of–
(a) simple sentence
(b) complex compound sentence
29 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(c) complex sentence
(d) compound sentence
Q109. If a student of language is cramming his/her answers, then he/she would not be able to–
(a) attempt question answers
(b) attempt vocabulary-based exercise
(c) attempt structural questions
(d) attempt creative writing
Q110. During reading, if a student is piercing information together as they read a text keeping track of what is happening, he/she is–
(a) inferring
(b) skimming
(c) paraphrasing
(d) synthesizing
Q111. Which one of the following does not affect the intonation?
(a) Voice/Pronunciation
(b) Tone
(c) Rhythm
(d) Loudness
Q112. _____ are involved in thinking.
(a) Image, language, imagination, proposition
(b) Image, imagination, concept, proposition
(c) Imagination, language, concept, proposition
(d) Image, language, concept, proposition
Q113. Language laboratory is the place where the learners have to listen on headphone. The language labs are set up with a view to provide listening activities in order to develop–
(a) analysis habit
(b) speech habit
(c) criticizing habit
(d) listening activities
Q114. Grammar-translation method is basically used to teach–
(a) grammar
(b) foreign language usage
(c) rules of any language usage
30 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(d) classical language
Q115. Which one of the following can be used as a rubric for the assessment of fluency and coherence of language?
(a) Can express with some flexibility and appropriacy on variety of topics
(b) Can initiate and logically develop simple conversation on a familiar topic
(c) Is always comprehensible, uses appropriate intonation
(d) Demonstrates hesitation to find words or use correct grammatical structures
Q116. Which one of the following is not the objective defined by NCF–2005 for teaching English at upper primary level?
(a) To negotiate their own learning goals and evaluate their own progress; edit, revise, review their own work
(b) To use dictionary suitable to their needs
(c) To be able to articulate individual/personal responses effectively
(d) To promote learners’ conceptualization of printed texts in terms of heading, paragraph and horizontal lines
Q117. If you are listening to the description of how to reach a specific location, then you are doing–
(l) casual listening
(b) focused listening
(c) intensive listening
(d) extensive listening
Q118. If a language teacher has put the words ‘school, teacher, headmaster, peon’ in a group, then she is following–
(a) lexical grouping
(b) semantic grouping
(c) phonetic grouping
(d) grammatical grouping
Q119. “At the initial stages of language learning, _____ may be one of the languages for learning activities that create the child’s awareness to the world.” (NCF–2005)
(a) English
(b) Vernacular language
(c) Second language
(d) Hindi
Q120. Little or no attention is given to pronunciation in _____ method.
(a) audio-lingual
(b) grammar-translation
31 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(c) CLT
(d) SLT
भाग -IV
भाषा - I — हिंदी
मिंत्वपूर्ण : परीक्षार्थी भाग —IV ( प्रश्न सं॰ 91 से 120) के प्रश्नों के उत्तर केवल तभी दें यदद उन्िंोंने भाषा-I का ववकल्प हिंदी चुना िंो।
वनदेश: नीचे ददए गए गद्यंश को पढ़कर पूछे गए प्रश्नों ( प्रश्न सं॰ 91 से 98) के सिंी/सबसे उपयुक्त उत्तर वाले ववकल्प को चुवनए।
भारत 15 अगस्त 1947 को आज़ाद हुआ। इस आज़ादी के वलए पूरे देश की जनता ने एक लंबा और मुवककल संघषण चलाया र्था। इस सघशण में सताज के बहुत सारे तबकों की विंस्सेदारी र्थी। तरिं-तरिं की पृष्ठभूवम के लोगों ने इसमें भाग वलया। वे स्वतंत्रता, समानता तर्था वनर्णय प्रदिया में विंस्सेदारी के ववचारों से प्रेररत र्थे। औपवनवेवशक शासन के तिंत लोग विरिश सरकार से भयभीत रिंते र्थे। वे सरकार के बहुत सारे फ़ैसलों से असिंमत र्थे। लेदकन अगर वे इन फ़ैसलों की आलोचना करते तो उन्िंें भारी खतरों का सामना करना पड़ता र्था। स्वतंत्रता आंदोलन ने यिं वस्र्थवत बदल डाली। राष्ट्रवादी खुलेआम विरिश सरकार की आलोचना करने लगे और अपनी मााँगें पेश करने लगे। 1885 में िंी भारतीय राकरीय कांग्रस ने मााँग की दक ववधावयका में वनवाणवचत सदस्य िंोने चाविंए और उन्िंें बजि पर चचाण करने एवं प्रश्न पूछने का अवधकार वमलना चाविंए। 1909 में बने गवनणमेंि आफ इंवडया एक्ि ने कुछ िंद तक वनवाणवचत प्रवतवनवधत्व की व्यवस्र्था को मंजूरी दे दी। िंालााँदक विरिश सरकार के अंतगणत बनाई गई ये शुरुआती ववधावयकाएाँ राष्ट्रवाददयों के बढ़ते जा रिंे दबाव के कारर् िंी बनी र्थीं, लेदकन इनमें भी सभी वयस्कें को न तो वोि डालने का अवधकार ददया गया र्था और न िंी आम लोग वनर्णय प्रदिया में विंस्सा ले सकते र्थे।
Q91. लोग दकन ववचारों से प्रेररत िंोकर आज़ादी के संघषण में शावमल हुए
(a) स्वतंत्रता
(b) समानता
(c) वनर्णय प्रदिया में विंस्सेदारी
(d) उपयुणक्त सभी
Q92. आजादी के वलए संघषण दकसने चलाया?
(a) भारतीय राष्ट्रीय कांग्रेस ने
(b) देश की जनता ने
(c) विरिश सरकार ने
(d) सदस्यों ने
Q93. वनम्नवलवखत में से लोकतंवत्रक व्यवस्र्था का मूल्य कौनसा िंै?
(a) समानता
(b) स्वतंत्रता
(c) ववचारों की अवभव्यवक्त
(d) उपयुणक्त सभी
Q94. आंदोलन का क्या असर पड़ा?
(a) विरिश शासक चले गए
(b) सरकार की खुलकर आलोचना िंोने लगी
32 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(c) लोगों को विंस्सेदारी वमल गई
(d) लोकतंत्र स्र्थावपत िंो गया
Q95. कांगेस की क्या मााँग र्थी?
(a) भारतीय पुरजोर ववरोध करें
(b) ववधावयका में चुने हुए सदस्य िंों
(c) अंग्रेजों भारत छोड़ो ।
(d) आजादी दो
Q96. सबसे सिीक/सार्थणक वाक्य चुवनए।
(a) संघषण मनुष्य को सफलता ददलाता िंै।
(b) संघषण मनुष्य को उजाड़ता िंै।
(c) संघषण मनुष्य को भिकाता िंै।
(d) संघषण मनुष्य को वनखारता िंै।
Q97. ‘खुलेआम’ शब्द का सबसे सार्थणक प्रयोग िंै-
(a) खुलेआम नगाड़े बज रिंे र्थे।
(b) खुलेआम बरसात िंो रिंी र्थी।
(c) खुलेआम बुराइयााँ िंो रिंी र्थीं।
(d) खुलेआम नाक बज रिंी र्थी।
Q98. ‘दबाव’ शब्द का प्रयोग किंााँ पर िंोगा?
(a) चढ़ता _______________ वगरता गया।
(b) िंवा का _______________ कम गया।
(c) भीड़-भाड़ _______________ से र्था।
(d) सभी चुपचाप _______________ से र्थे।
वनदेश: नीचे ददए गए कववता को पढ़कर पूछे गए प्रश्नों (प्रश्न सं० 99 से 105) के सिंी/सबसे उपयुक्त उत्तर वाले ववकल्प को चुवनए।
मुख्य गायक के चट्टान जैसे भारी स्वर का सार्थ देती
विं आवाज सुंदर कमजोर कााँपती हुई र्थी
विं मुख्य गायक का छोिा भाई िंै
या उसका वशष्य
या पैदल
मुख्य गायक की गरज में
विं अपनी गूाँज वमलाता आया िंै प्राचीन काल से
गायक जब अंतरे की जरिल तानों के जंगल मे
खो चुका िंोता िंै
33 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
या अपने िंी सरगम को लााँघकर
च्ला जाता िंै भिकता हुआ एक अनिंद में
त्ब संगतकार िंी स्र्थायी को साँभाले रिंता िंै
जैसे समेिता िंो मुक्ष्य गायक का पीछे छूिा हुआ सामान
जैसे उसे याद ददलाता िंो उसका बचपर
ज बविं नौवसवखया र्था
तारसप्तक में जब बैठने लगता िंै उसका गला
प्रेरर्ा सार्थ छोड़ती हुई उत्सािं अस्त िंोता हुआ
आवाज से राख जैसा कुछ वगरता हुआ
तभी मुख्य गायक को ढााँढ़स बाँधाता
किंीं से चला आता िंै संगतकार का स्वर
कभी-कभी विं यो िंी दे देता िंै उसका सार्थ
यिं बताने के वलए दक विं अकेला निंीं िंै
और यिं दक दफर से गया जा सकता िंै
गाया जा चुका राग
और उसकी आवाज में जो एक विंचक साफ़ सुनाई देती िंै
या अपने स्वर को ऊाँचा न उठाने की जो कोवशश िंै
डसे ववफता निंीं
डसकी मनुष्यता समझा जाना चाविंए।
Q99. संगतकार के माध्यम से कवव दकस प्रकार के व्यवक्तयों की ओर संकेत करना चािं रिंा िंै?
(a) सिंयोगी
(b) सहृदय
(c) समरस
(d) संगददल
Q100. ‘चट्टान’ जैसा भारी स्वर से आशय िंै.
(a) मोिी आवाज़़्
(b) पुरुष की आवाज़़्
(c) गंभीर आवाज़़्
(d) पत्र्थर की आवाज़़्
Q101. ‘‘गायक जब अंतरे की जरिल तानों के जंगल में खो चुका िंोता िंै’’ के मायने िंैं– अंतरे को गाते हुए विं–
(a) भिक जाता िंै
(b) लीन िंो जाता िंै
(c) बेसुरा िंो जाता िंै
(d) बेलगाम िंो जाता िंै
Q102. ‘अनिंद’ शब्द में.
(a) ‘अ’ उपसगण िंै
34 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(b) ’द’ प्रत्यय िंै
(c) ’अन’ उपसगण िंै
(d) ‘िंद’ प्रत्यय िंै
Q103. ‘राख जैसा कुछ वगरता हुआ’ का अर्थण िंै.
(a) बुझाता हुआ स्वर
(b) ऊाँचा स्वर
(c) उदास स्वर
(d) भयभीत स्वर
Q104. ‘संगतकार’ का अर्थण िंै.
(a) गायक का साज उठाने वाला
(b) गायक के सार्थ रिंने वाला
(c) गायक के सार्थ गाने वाला
(d) गायाक को वबखरने से बचाने वाला
Q105. ‘ढ़ााँढ़स बाँधाना’ का अर्थण िंै.
(a) तसल्ली देना
(b) आशीवाणद देना
(c) आज्ञा देना
(d) रक्षासूत्र बााँधना
वनदेश: नीचे ददए गए प्रश्नों (प्रश्न सं० 106 से 120) के सिंी/सबसे उपयुक्त उत्तर वाले ववकल्प को चुवनए।
Q106. ‘पढ़ना सीखने के वलए आवकयक िंै दक–
(a) केवल लक्ष्य भाषा सुनने का मािंौल िंो
(b) घर की भाषा सुनने बोलने की वमले
(c) लक्ष्य भाषा की अर्थणपूर्ण और रोचक सामग्री सुनने पढ़ने को वमले
(d) चािण अवधक से अवध्क कक्षा में लगाए जाएाँ
Q107. भाशा केवल अवभव्यवक्त का माध्यम िंी निंीं बवल्क स्वयं से ........... का माध्यम िंै।
(a) वलखने
(b) पढ़ने
(c) बातचीत
(d) सुनने
Q108. ‘लड़के िंोकर रोते िंो’ यिं कर्थन-
(a) भाषा को बच्चों की दृवि से पढ़ने को बाध्य करता िंै
35 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(b) भाषा को अध्यापको की दृवटि से पढ़ने को बाध्य िंोता िंै
(c) भाषा को जेंडर की दृवि से पढ़ने को बाध्य करता िंै
(d) भाषा को व्याकरर् की दृवि से पढ़ने को बाध्य करता िंै
Q109. किंानी के सदभण में कौन सा कर्थन उपयुक्त लगता िंै
(a) किंानी में संवाद िंोना आवशयक िंै।
(b) किंानी में शुरुआत िंोना आवकयक िंै।
(c) किंानी में शुद्ध भाषा िंोना आवकयक िंै।
(d) किंानी में कर्थानक का िंोना आवकयक िंै।
Q110. एक भाषा के अध्यापक को बच्चों में–
(a) भाषा वसद्धांतों की समझ ववकवसत करने पर बल देना चाविंए
(b) आलंकाररक भाषा प्रयोग की समझ ववकवसत करने पर बल देना चाविंए
(c) ववववध संदभों में भाषा प्रयोग की क्षमता ववकवसत करने पर बल देना चाविंए
(d) शुद्ध भाषा प्रयोग की क्षमता ववकवसत करने पर बल देना चाविंए
Q111 ‘कोई भाषा दकसी भी वलवप में वलखी जा सकती िंै’ इस कर्थन पर आपकी राय िंै दक-
(a) यिं वबल्कुल संभव निंीं
(b) यिं बहुत िंद तक संभव िंै
(c) िंर भाषा की अपनी वलवप िंोती िंै
(d) भाषा और वलवप के बीच एक सीधा संबंध िंै
Q112. भाषा सभी ववषयों के ............. में िंै।
(a) पढ़ने
(b) अध्यायों
(c) केंद्र
(d) प्रारंभ
Q113. ‘कववता का एक वनवित अर्थण िंोता िंै, वजसे सभी ववद्यार्थर्थयों को पढ़ना चाविंए’ इस कर्थन के बारे में आप मानते िंैं दक-
(a) दकसी कववता के एक वनवित अर्थण के सार्थ पढ़ना चाविंए
(b) सभी ववद्यार्थी अपने अनुभव और पररवेश में िंी कववता समझते िंैं
(c) कवव ने कववता एक अर्थण में वलखी वजसे िंर ववद्यार्थी को समझना चाविंए
(d) अलग.अलग अर्थण समझने से पढ़ने की प्रदिया बावधत िंोती िंै
Q114. आप मानते िंैं दक अलग–अलग तरिं की सामग्री पढ़ने के अवसर वमलने से–
(a) भाषा को ववववध संदभों में प्रयोग करने की समझ बनती िंै
36 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(b) व्याकरर् सम्मत भाषा सीखने को वमलती िंै
(c) दकताबों के बारे में जानकारी वमलती िंै
(d) लेखकों के बारे में जानकारी वमलती िंै
Q115. हिंदी में ववज्ञान संबंधी पाठों को पढ़ाने का उद्देकय िंै-
(a) ववज्ञान की भाषा को समझना
(b) ववज्ञान ववषय को गिंराई से जानना
(c) ववज्ञान के प्रवत वजज्ञासा बढ़ाना
(d) ववज्ञान के संदर्थण में हिंदी भाषा प्रयोग को समझना
Q116. लेखन क्षमता के आकलन के वलए-
(a) अवभवयक्त ववचारों को जााँचना िंोगा
(b) व्याकरर् सम्मत भाषा को देखना िंोगा
(c) अर्थणपूर्ण वाक्यों और संदभों को देखना िंोगा
(d) वलखावि की सफ़ाई और सुंदरता को जााँचना िंोगा
Q117. हिंदी के पाठों में अन्य भाषाओं के शब्दों के िंोने का अर्थण िंै-
(a) पाठ का लेखक हिंदी निंीं जानता
(b) पाठ समाज के बहुभाषी स्वरूप की सिंज प्रस्तुवत िंै
(c) पाठ करठन और अस्पि िंै
(d) ववद्यार्थर्थयों को शुद्ध भाषा निंीं वसखाई जा रिंी
Q118. आपकी दृवि में अभ्यास-
(a) पाठ को समझने में मदद करते िंैं
(b) बच्चों को तार्ककक बनाते िंैं
(c) बच्चों को भाषा के बारे मे बाते िंैं
(d) बच्चों को उत्तर देना वसखाते िंैं
Q119. उच्च प्रावममक स्तर की पाठयसामग्री में अनुवाद सामग्री रखने का उद्देकय िंै-
(a) बहुत सी सामग्री से पररचय कराना
(b) प्रचुर हिंदी साविंत्य का न िंोना
(c) अन्य भाषाओं के साविंत्य को हिंदी में पढ़ने के अवसर देना
(d) पूरे देश को पढ़ने के अवसर देना
Q120. यदद आपकी कक्षा में दृविबावधत बच्चे िंैंए तो आप-
(a) उन्िंें ववशेष सिंानुभूवत से पढ़ाएाँगे
37 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(b) उन्िंें पढ़ने के उपयुक्त साधन कराएाँगे
(c) उन्िंें सभी बच्चों से अलग गवतवववध देंगे
(d) उनसे कम गवतवववधयााँ कराएाँगे
PART—V
Language —II — ENGLISH
IMPORTANT: Candidates should attempt questions from Part—V (Q. Nos. 121 to 150), if they have opted for ENGLISH as Language—II only.
Directions: Read the passage given below and answer the questions that follow (Q. Nos. 121 to 129) by selecting the correct/most appropriate options.
The strength of Indian democracy lies in its tradition, in the fusion of the ideas of democracy and national independence which was characteristic of the Indian national movement long before independence. Although the British retained supreme authority over India until 1947, the provincial elections of 1937 provided real exercise in democratic practice before national independence. During the Pacific War, India was not overrun or seriously invaded by the Japanese and after the War was over, the transfer of power to a government of the Indian Congress Party was a peaceful one as far as Britain was concerned. By 1947, ‘Idealization’ had already gone far in the Indian Civil Service and army, so that the new government could start with effective instruments of central control.
After independence, however, India was faced with two vast problems, the first, that of ethnic diversity and the aspirations of sub-nationalities. The Congress leadership was more aware of the former problem than of the second; as a new political elite which had rebelled not only against the British Raj, but also against India’s social order; they were conscious of the need to initiate economic development and undertake social reforms, but as nationalists who had led a struggle against alien rule on behalf of all parts of India, they took the cohesion of the Indian nation too much for granted and underestimated the centrifugal forces of ethnic division, which were bound to be accentuated rather than diminished as the popular masses were more and more drawn into politics. The Congress Party was orginally opposed to the idea of recognizing any division of India on a linguistic basis and preferred to retain the old provinces of British India which often cut across linguistic boundaries; it was only in response to strong pressures from below that the principle of linguistic States was conceded as the basis of a federal ‘Indian Union’. The rights granted to the States created new problems for the Central Government. The idea of making Hindi the national language of a united India was thwarted by the recalcitrance of the speakers of other important Indian languages, and the autonomy of the States rendered central economic planning extremely difficult.
Land reforms remained under the control of the States and many large-scale economic projects required a degree of cooperation between the Central Government and one or more of the States which it was found impossible to achieve. Coordination of policies was difficult even when the Congress Party was in power both in the States and at the Centre; when a Congress government in Delhi was confronted with non-Congress parties in office in the States, it became much harder.
Q121. Choose the word which is most nearly the same in meaning as the word ‘thwarted’ as used in the passage.
38 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(a) Opposed
(b) Implemented
(c) Accepted
(d) Diverted
Q122. Choose the word which is most opposite in meaning of the word ‘conceded’ as used in the passage.
(a) Criticized
(b) Rejected
(c) Denounced
(d) Withdrawn
Q123. Why was central economic planning found to be difficult?
(a) Multiplicity of States and Union Territories
(b) Lack of coordination in different government departments
(c) Autonomy given to the States in certain matters
(d) Lack of will in implementing land reforms
Q124. Which one of the following problems was India faced with after independence?
(a) Military attack from across the border
(b) Lack of coordination between the Central and State Governments
(c) Improper coordination of various government policies
(d) Increasing the production from a very blow level
Q125. Which one of the following issues was not appropriately realized by the Central Government?
(a) Ethnic diversity of the people
(b) A national language for the country
(c) Implementation of the formulated policies
(d) Centre-State relations
Q126. Which, according to the passage, can be cited as exercise in democratic practice in India before independence?
(a) The handing over of the power by British to India
(b) The Idealization of the Indian Civil Service
(c) Several democratic institutions created by the Indian National Congress
(d) None of the above
Q127. Which one of the following statements is not true as per the passage ?
(a) The Congress Party was originally opposed to the idea of division of States on linguistic basis.
(b) Economic development and social reforms were initiated soon after independence.
(c) The political elite in India rebelled against the British Raj.
(d) The Congress leadership was fully aware of the problems of ethnic diversity in India at the time of independence.
Q128. Why was the linguistic reorganization of the States accepted?
39 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(a) The States were not cooperating with the Central Government.
(b) Non-Congress governments in the States demanded such a reorganization of the States.
(c) No common national language could be emerged.
(d) Strong pressures from the States were exerted on the Central Government to create such States.
Q129. India was not overrun by the Japanese during the Pacific War because–
(a) Japan had friendly relations with Britain
(b) Japan was interested in India’s freedom
(c) Japan was skeptical about its success in War
(d) None of the above
Directions : Read the passage given below and answer the questions that follow (Q. Nos. 130 to 135) by selecting the correct/most appropriate options.
“A principal fruit of friendship”, Francis Bacon wrote in his timeless meditation on the subject, “it the ease and discharge of the fullness and swellings of the heart, which passions of all kinds do cause and induce.” For Thoreau, friendship was one of life’s great rewards. But in today’s cultural landscape of muddled relationships scattered across various platforms for connecting, amidst constant debates about whether our Facebook ‘friendships’ are making us more or less happy, it pays to consider what friendship actually is. That’s precisely what CUNY Philosophy professor Massimo Pagliacci explores in Answers for Aristotle : How Science and Philosophy Can Lead Us to a More Meaningful Life (public library), which also gave us this provocative read on the science of what we call ‘intuition’.
Philosophers and cognitive scientists agree that friendship is an essential ingredient of human happiness. But beyond the dry academic definitions–like, say, “voluntary interdependence between two persons over time, which is intended to facilitate socio-emotional goals of the participants, and may involve varying types and degrees of companionship, intimacy, affection and mutual assistance”–lies a body of compelling research that sheds light on how, precisely, friendship augments happiness. The way friendship enhances well–being, it turns out, has nothing to do with quantity and everything to do with quality–researchers confirm that it isn’t the number of friends (or, in the case of Facebook, ‘friends’).
Q130. The change in the present situation which has forced us to rethink the concept of friendship is–
(a) Bacon and Thoreau’s theories are no longer available to read
(b) the arrival of social media on the scene
(c) there is more interest in the sciences
(d) friendships are not possible in the real world anymore, due to over-competition
Q131. Friendship leads to happiness. Is it true?
(a) Yes, researches have proven that friendship does lead to happiness
(b) No, there is no relationship between friendship and happiness
(c) Friends cannot make each other happy
(d) One needs to find one’s happiness alone, with peace of mind
Q132. Did Pigliucci’s book discuss intuition too?
40 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(a) No, it only discussed friendship
(b) It just explained science and philosophy
(c) It discussed Aristotle’s theories
(d) Yes
Q133. Is the quality of friends important?
(a) No, it is important to have more number of friends, quality does not mater
(b) No, number of comments on social networking sites is important, not the quality of friends
(c) Yes, it matters
(d) No, quality comes automatically with quantity
Q134. As per the first paragraph, what are the debates about?
(a) They are centered around whether our Facebook friends are helping us become more or less happy.
(b) There are no debates around friendship.
(c) The quality of comments of social media is debatable.
(d) Thoreau and Aristotle’s thinking is at loggerheads.
Q135. The word that is opposite in meaning to the word ‘muddled’ is–
(a) confused
(b) chaotic
(c) ordered
(d) rumpled
Directions: Answer the following questions (Q. Nos. 136 to 150) by selecting the correct/most appropriate options.
Q136. Positive interference is a kind of–
(a) target language
(b) foreign language
(c) pictorial language
(d) native language
Q137. In learning the new language, multilingualism is–
(a) a methodology
(b) an asset
(c) an interference
(d) a burden
Q138. Note taking is done–
(a) during a lecture
(b) while reading a review
(c) during extensive reference work
(d) while writing an essay
Q139. The method of teaching foreign language without using the pupil’s first language is–
41 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
(a) direct method
(b) classical method
(c) grammar-translation method
(d) old method
Q140. Two words have identical sound and spelling, but not related in meaning. It is known as–
(a) homophone
(b) homonymy
(c) homograph
(d) polysemy
Q141. Language of word is not necessary for–
(a) imaginative thinking
(b) conceptual thinking
(c) associative thinking
(d) perceptual thinking
Q142. Communicative Language Teaching replaced basically–
(a) Natural Language Processing
(b) Structural Teaching
(c) Situational Language Teaching
(d) Motivational Teaching
Q143. Students are not organisms. Which one of the following methods sees them as a whole person?
(a) CLT
(b) SLT
(c) Silent way
(d) CLL
Q144. Writing is the ________ representation of speech sounds.
(a) alphabetical
(b) graphical
(c) phonetic
(d) systematic
Q145. When a teacher uses realia to teach vocabulary and grammar, she is–
(a) using role play as a learning device
(b) using real objects, actions and real-life situations
(c) using computer technology
(d) teaching through true stories
42 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
Q146. A poem whose first letters of each line spell out a word is called–
(a) alliterative
(b) epic
(c) acrostic
(d) haiku
Q147. Decorum in spoken English pertains to–
(a) appropriate gestures
(b) clarity and purity of style
(c) correct grammatical usage
(d) voice quality
Q148. Inquiry-based curriculum is based on–
(a) deductive reasoning
(b) inductive reasoning
(c) heuristic reasoning
(d) analogical reasoning
Q149. Which of the following are structural words?
(a) Auxiliaries
(b) Prepositions
(c) Conjunctions
(d) All of the above
Q150. Conventions of writing include–
(a) story ideas
(b) proper punctuation
(c) imagination
(d) good vocabulary
भाग – IV
भाषा -I - विंन्दी
मिंत्वपूर्ण: परीक्षार्थी भाग- V (प्रश्न सं॰ 121 से 150) के प्रश्नों के उत्तर केवल तभी दें यदद उन्िंोंने भाषा - II का ववकल्प हिंदी चुना िंो।
वनदेश: नीचे ददए गए अनुच्छेद को पढ़कर पूछे गए प्रश्नों (प्रश्न सं॰ 121 से 128) के सिंी/सबसे उपयुक्त उत्तर वाले ववकल्प को चुवनए।
मेरा र्थोड़ा बहुत संबंध साविंत्य की दुवनया से भी िंै। यिंी िंालात मैं यिंााँ भी देखता हाँ युरोपीय साविंत्य का फैशन िंमारे उपन्यासकारों किंानी-लेखकों और कववयों पर झि िंावी िंो जाता िंै। मैं अपने प्रांत पंजाब की बात करता हाँ। मेरे पंजाब में युवा कववयों की नयी पौध सामावजक व्यवस्र्था के वखलाफ़ इंकलाबी जज़्बे से ओत-प्रोत िंै। इसमें भ्रिाचार, अन्याय शोषर् को िंिाने और एक नयी व्यवस्र्था बनाने की बात की गई िंै। िंााँ िंमें सामावजक बदलाव की जरूरत िंै और इन कववताओं में बातें तो बहुत अच्छे ढ़ंग से किंी गयी िंैं पर इनका स्वरूप़् देसी निंीं िंै। इस पर पविम का प्रभाव िंै। पररर्ाम यिं िंै दक यिं सारा इंकलाब एक छोिे-से कागज पर सीवमत रिं जाता िंै। बस, साविंवत्यक समझ रखने वाले एक छोिे-से समूिं में इनकी बात िंोती िंै। दकसान मजदूर, जो शोषर् को झेल रिंे िंैं वजन्िंें वे इंकलाब की प्रेरर्ा देना चािंते िंैं वे इसे समझ िंी निंीं पाते िंैं। इस साल मेरी मातृभूवम पंजाब में
43 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
मुझे गुरुनानक ववश्वववद्यालय के सीनेि का सदस्य बनाने के वलए नावमत दकया गया। जब मुझे उसकी पिंली मीटिग में शावमल िंोने के वलए बुलाया गया, तो मैं पंजाब में िंी प्रीतनगर के पास र्था। एक ददन शाम को अपने ग्रामीर् दोस्तों से गपशप करते हुए मैंने अमृतसर में िंोने वाली सीनेि की मीटिग में जाने का वटज़्ाि दकया तो दकसी ने किंा िंमारे सार्थ तो आप तिंमद (लुंगी) और कुते में िंमारे जैसे िंी बने दफरते िंो, विंााँ सूि-बूि पिंन कर सािंब बिंादुर बन जाओगे!’’ मैंने िंाँसते हुए किंा-‘‘क्यों, आप अगर चािंते िंैं तो ऐसे िंी चला जाऊाँगा।’’ तभी कोई दूसरा बोला, ‘‘आप ऐसा कर िंी निंीं सकते।
Q121. ‘युवा कववयों की नयी पौध’ से क्या तात्पयण िंै?
(a) वे कवव जो नए ववषयों पर वलख रिंे िंैं
(b) वे कवव जो अभी नए युवा िंैं
(c) वे युवा कवव वजन्िंोंने लेखन शुरू दकया
(d) वे युवा कवव जो नए ववषयों पर वलख रिंे िंैं
Q122. पंजाब के युवा कववयों के लेखन का ववषय िंै-
(a) सुव्यवस्र्था
(b) न्याय
(c) भ्रिाचार
(d) भावनाएाँ
Q123. “कववताओं का स्वरूप़् देसी निंीं िंै।” वाक्य से अवभप्राय िंै-
(a) कववताओं में शब्द पविम से प्रभाववत िंैं।
(b) कववताओं में शब्द पविम से प्रभाववत निंीं िंैं।
(c) कववताओं की अवभव्यवक्त पविम से प्रभाववत िंै।
(d) कववताओं का प्रकाशन पविम से प्रभाववत िंै।
Q124. अनुच्छेद के आधार पर बताइए दक दकनका शोषर् िंो रिंा िंै।
(a) दकसानों और कववयों का
(b) कववयों और मजदूरों का का
(c) कववयों और लेखकों का
(d) दकसानों और मजदूरों का का
Q125. अनुच्छेद के आधार पर बताइए दक पंजाब प्रांत के आदमी सामान्तः क्या पिंनते िंैं।
(a) कुताण-पजामा
(b) कुाण-लुंगी
(c) कुताण और पैंि
(d) सूि-बूि
Q126. कागज पर सीवमत िंो जाने से तात्पयण िंै-
(a) जमीनी स्तर पर बदलाव न आना
(b) जमीनी स्तर पर बदलाव आना
(c) जमीनी स्तर पर ऊाँचा उठना
(d) जमीनी स्तर पर ऊाँचा न उठना
44 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
Q127. “इस पर पविमी का प्रभाव िंै।” वाक्य िंै-
(a) संबंधवाचक
(b) ववधानवाचक
(c) प्रचनवाचक
(d) संदेिंवाचक
Q128. ‘ग्रामीर्ए सामावजक, युवा’ आदद शब्द िंैं-
(a) संज्ञा
(b) सवणनाम
(c) ववशेषर्
(d) दिया
वनदेश: नीचे ददए गए अनुच्छेद को पढ़कर पूछे गए प्रश्नों (प्रश्न सं॰ 129 से 135) के सिंी/सबसे उपयुक्त उत्तर वाले ववकल्प को चुवनए।
माइकलएंजेलो इिली के बहुत प्रवसद्ध वशल्पकार र्थे। वे बड़ी सुन्दर मूर्थतयााँ बनाते र्थे। लोगों ने पूछा दक आप इतनी सुंदर मूर्थत कैसे गढ़ लेते िंैं। उन्िंोंने किंा दक मैं मूर्थत कािंााँ गढ़ता िंैाँ। विं मूर्थत तो पिंले से िंी पत्र्थर में र्थी, मैंने तो वसफ़ण पत्र्थर का फालतू विंस्सा िंिा ददया तो मूर्थत प्रकि िंो गयी! तो ववद्यार्थी को अपना पररचय पाने में, स्व-भान िंोने में मदद करना िंी वशक्षक का काम िंै। अब यिं स्व-भान कैसे िंो? किंते िंैं, सेल्फ़ इज़़् लाइक अ रे - जो साइंस में माना जाता िंै दक प्रकाश की दकरर् अदृकय िंोती िंै, विं आपको ददखाई देती िंै, वैसे िंमारा जो ‘स्व’ िंै विं शून्य मे, अभाव में समझ में निंीं आता। विं तब प्रकि िंोता िंै, जब मैं स्व-धमण कतणव्य-कमण करता हाँ। कमण करते-करते मुवककल का जब मैं सामना करता हाँ तब मेरा रूप, मेरी शवक्त, मेरे स्व का मुझे पता चलता िंै। स्व-धमण रूप़् कमण करते हुए जो स्व मेरे सामने व्सक्त िंोता िंै, विंी मेरी वशक्षा िंै। इसवलए वशक्षा दी निंीं जा सकती, बवल्क अंदर से अंकुररत िंोती िंै और उस प्रदिया में वशक्षक केवल बािंर से मदद करता िंै। जैसे पौधे के अंकुररत िंोने में, इसके प्रफुवल्लत िंोने में सीधा िंम कुछ निंीं कर सकते। परंतु बािंर से खाद-पानी देना, वनराई करना, प्रकाश की व्यवस्र्था आदद कर सकते िंैं।
Q129. अनुच्छेद के आधार पर किंा जा सकता िंै दक-
(a) वशक्षा देना संभव िंै
(b) वशक्षा देना संभव निंीं िंै।
(c) वशक्षा ववद्यालय में वमलती िंै
(d) वशक्षा पररवार में वमलती िंै
Q130. वशक्षक का काम िंै-
(a) ववद्यार्थी को स्वयं से पररवचत कराना
(b) ववद्यार्थी को दूसरों से पररवचत कराना
(c) ववद्यार्थी को ववषयों से पररवचत कराना
(d) ववद्यार्थी को वशल्प-कला से पररवचत कराना
Q 131. ‘स्व’ का प्रकािय.......... में िंोता िंै।
(a) रोशनी
(b) कमण
(c) शवक्त
(d) शून्य
45 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
Q132. अनुच्छेद में खाद-पानी देने, वनराई करने का उदािंरर् बताता िंै दक वशक्षक का कायण बच्चों को-
(a) भोजन-पानी देने का िंै
(b) वनयंवत्रत करना िंै
(c) उवचत मािंौल देना िंै
(d) बागवानी वसखाना िंै
Q133. ‘स्व’-
(a) दृकयमान िंोता िंै
(b) प्रकाश िंोता िंै
(c) दकरर् िंोता िंै
(d) अदृकय िंोता िंै
Q134. “वे बड़ी सुंदर मूर्थतयााँ बनाते र्थे” वाक्य में प्रववशेषर् िंै-
(a) वे
(b) बड़ी
(c) सुंदर
(d) मूर्थतयााँ
Q135. ‘अंकुररत’ शब्द में प्रत्यय िंै-
(a) इत
(b) ररत
(c) त
(d) अं
वनदेश: नीचे ददए गए प्रश्नों (प्रश्न सं॰ 136 से 150) के सिंी/सबसे उपयुक्त उत्तर वाले ववकल्प को चुवनए।
Q136. उच्च प्रार्थवमक स्तर पर भाषा सीखने-वसखाने का एक उद्देकय िंै-
(a) व्याकरर् के सभी वनयमों को कंठस्र्थ करना
(b) साविंत्य की गद्य एवं पद्य ववधाओं की रचना
(c) हिंदी भाषा के समग्र इवतिंास के बारे में जानना
(d) भाषा की वनयमबद्ध प्रकृवत की पिंचान और उसका ववश्लेषर् करना
Q137. हिंदी भाषा सीखने के संदभण में कक्षा आठ में पढ़ने वाले बच्चे से यिं अपेवक्षत िंै दक विं-
(a) हिंदी भाषा की समस्त वनयमावली को जान सके
(b) हिंदी भाषा के मुिंावरों और लोकोवक्तयों को जान सकें
(c) वववभन्न संदभों में हिंदी भाष का प्रभावी प्रयोग कर सके
(d) तत्समप्रधान भाषा का प्रभावी प्रयोग कर सके
46 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
Q138. हिंदी भाषा सीखने-वसखाने के वलए अवनवायण िंै-
(a) भाषा की पाठ्य-पुस्तक की उपलब्ध्ता
(b) समुद्ध भाषा-पररवेश की उपलब्ध्ता
(c) हिंदी भाषा की वलवखत परीक्षा
(d) भाषा की दृकय-श्रव्य सामग्री की उपलब्धता
Q139. उच्च प्रार्थवमक स्तर पर हिंदी भाषा के आकलन में सबसे मिंत्वपूर्ण िंै-
(a) हिंदी भाषा के व्याकरर् की जानकारी
(b) हिंदी भाषा की बारीदकयों की समझ व प्रयोग
(c) हिंदी भाषा के साविंत्यकारें की जानकारी
(d) हिंदी भाषा की मानक वतणनी की जानकारी
Q140. भाषा अजणन के संबंध में कौन-सा कर्थन सिंी िंै?
(a) यिं सिंज िंोता िंै।
(b) यिं सरल िंोता िंै।
(c) यिं करठन िंोता िंै।
(d) यिं सीखा जाता िंै।
Q141. उच्च प्रार्थवमक स्तर पर वववभन्ऩ् ववषयों पर आधाररत पाठों को पाठ्य-पुस्तक में शावमल करने का उद्देकय िंै-
(a) बच्चों को वववभन्ऩ् ववषयों की जानकारी देना
(b) बच्चों को वववभन्ऩ् प्रयुवक्तयों से पररवचत कराना
(c) अन्य ववषयों को सीखने में मदद करना
(d) अन्य ववषयों को सीखने में मदद करना
Q142. आकलन का प्रयोग .......... के वलए िंोना चाविंए।
(a) सीखने में मदद
(b) दकतना सीखा को आाँकने
(c) परस्पर तुलना
(d) भाषा की जानकारी
Q143. दृकय-श्रव्य सामग्री का प्रयोग तब उपयोगी िंोता िंै जब बच्चे-
(a) उसे बहुत सरलता से समझ सकें
(b) उस पर अपनी बौवद्धक प्रवतदिया दे सकें
(c) उसकी भाषा का अनुकरर् कर सकें
(d) उसके बरने की प्रदिया को बता सकें
Q144. उच्च प्रार्थवमक स्तर पर वववभन्न उद्देकयों के वलए दकए जाने वाले लेखन कायण में सबसे मिंत्वपूर्ण -
(a) जल संरक्षर् का ववज्ञापन बनाना
(b) आपदा प्रबंधन पर स्लोगन वलखना
(c) अधूरी किंानी का अंत वलखना
(d) डायरी वलखना
47 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
Q145. उच्च प्रार्थवमक स्तर पर हिंदी भाषा के आकलन का सबसे कमजोर हबदु िंै-
(a) वलखने में नए शब्द इस्तेमाल करना
(b) लेखन में तार्कककता का समावेश
(c) भाषा का सृजनात्मक प्रयोग
(d) संस्कृतवनष्ठ शब्दावली का प्रयोग
Q146. भाषा और वलवप के बीच-
(a) एक वनवित संबंध िंोता िंै
(b) कोई वनवित संबंध निंीं िंोता
(c) एक तार्ककक संबंध िंोता िंै
(d) कोई संबंध िंोता िंी निंीं िंै
Q147. उच्च प्रार्थवमक स्तर पर हिंदी भाषा का आकलन करते समय आप सवाणवधक बल दकस पर देंगे?
(a) वलवखत परीक्षा
(b) मौवखक परीक्षा
(c) पोिणफ़ोवलयो
(d) जााँच-सूची
Q148. बहुभावषक कक्षा में बच्चों की भाषाएाँ-
(a) बहुत गंभीर समस्या िंै, वजसका कोई समाधान निंीं िंै
(b) संसाधन के रूप में इस्तेमाल की जा सकती िंैं
(c) एक जरिल समस्या िंै, जो अन्य समस्याएाँ पैदा करती िंैं
(d) हिंदी भाषा की कक्षाओं से बािंर िंी रिंनी चाविंए
Q149. उच्च प्रार्थवमक स्तर पर व्याकरर् पढ़ाने की आगमन पद्धवत में-
(a) जरिल से सरल की ओर जाते िंैं
(b) उदािंरर् से वनयम की ओर जाते िंैं
(c) वनयम से उदािंरर् की ओर जाते िंैं
(d) व्याकरर् की पाठ्य-पुस्तक पर केदद्रत रिंते िंैं।
Q150. अंतर्थनविंत भाषा क्षमता का संबंध ........... के सार्थ िंै।
(a) चाॅ म्स्की
(b) वपयाजे
(c) वस्कनर
(d) वाइगोत्सकी
48 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
CTET Paper-II (Code-M)
Answer Key
Child Pedagogy
S1. Ans.(c)
S2. Ans.(a)
S3. Ans.(d)
S4. Ans.(a)
S5. Ans.(b)
S6. Ans.(b)
S7. Ans.(c)
S8. Ans.(d)
S9. Ans.(a)
S10. Ans.(b)
S11. Ans.(d)
S12. Ans.(c)
S13. Ans.(d)
S14. Ans.(d)
S15. Ans.(b)
S16. Ans.(b)
S17. Ans.(d)
S18. Ans.(b)
S19. Ans.(a)
S20. Ans.(d)
S21. Ans.(b)
S22. Ans.(d)
S23. Ans.(a)
S24. Ans.(d)
S25. Ans.(b)
S26. Ans.(d)
S27. Ans.(b)
S28. Ans.(d)
S29. Ans.(b)
S30. Ans.(a) Mathematics
S31. Ans.(c)
S32. Ans.(c)
S33. Ans.(b)
S34. Ans.(a)
S35. Ans.(a)
S36. Ans.(d)
S37. Ans.(c)
S38. Ans.(c)
S39. Ans.(b)
S40. Ans.(b)
S41. Ans.(b)
S42. Ans.(b)
S43. Ans.(b)
S44. Ans.(c)
S45. Ans.(b)
S46. Ans.(b)
S47. Ans.(d)
S48. Ans.(b)
S49. Ans.(b)
S50. Ans.(d)
S51. Ans.(b)
S52. Ans.(d)
S53. Ans.(c)
S54. Ans.(a)
S55. Ans.(a)
S56. Ans.(d)
S57. Ans.(b)
S58. Ans.(d)
S59. Ans.(b)
S60. Ans.(a) Science
S61. Ans.(d)
S62. Ans.(b)
S63. Ans.(c)
49 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
S64. Ans.(b)
S65. Ans.(a)
S66. Ans.(c)
S67. Ans.(c)
S68. Ans.(a)
S69. Ans.(c)
S70. Ans.(b)
S71. Ans.(*)
S72. Ans.(c)
S73. Ans.(b)
S74. Ans.(a)
S75. Ans.(c)
S76. Ans.(c)
S77. Ans.(a)
S78. Ans.(b)
S79. Ans.(b)
S80. Ans.(d)
S81. Ans.(c)
S82. Ans.(c)
S83. Ans.(d)
S84. Ans.(a)
S85. Ans.(d)
S86. Ans.(b)
S87. Ans.(c)
S88. Ans.(c)
S89. Ans.(d)
S90. Ans.(a)
Language I-English
S91. Ans.(d)
S92. Ans.(a)
S93. Ans.(b)
S94. Ans.(a)
S95. Ans.(c)
S96. Ans.(b)
S97. Ans.(d)
S98. Ans.(b)
S99. Ans.(b)
S100. Ans.(a)
S101. Ans.(c)
S102. Ans.(c)
S103. Ans.(c)
S104. Ans.(b)
S105. Ans.(c)
S106. Ans.(a)
S107. Ans.(c)
S108. Ans.(b)
S109. Ans.(d)
S110. Ans.(d)
S111. Ans.(a)
S112. Ans.(c)
S113. Ans.(b)
S114. Ans.(d)
S115. Ans.(d)
S116. Ans.(d)
S117. Ans.(c)
S118. Ans.(b)
S119. Ans.(a)
S120. Ans.(b) Language II-Hindi
S121. Ans.(c)
S122. Ans.(c)
S123. Ans.(c)
S124. Ans.(d)
S125. Ans.(b)
S126. Ans.(a)
S127. Ans.(b)
S128. Ans.(c)
S129. Ans.(b)
S130. Ans.(a)
S131. Ans.(b)
S132. Ans.(c)
S133. Ans.(d)
S134. Ans.(b)
S135. Ans.(a)
S136. Ans.(d)
S137. Ans.(c)
S138. Ans.(b)
S139. Ans.(b)
S140. Ans.(a)
S141. Ans.(b)
S142. Ans.(a)
S143. Ans.(b)
S144. Ans.(d)
S145. Ans.(d)
S146. Ans.(b)
S147. Ans.(c)
S148. Ans.(b)
S149. Ans.(b)
S150. Ans.(a) Language I-Hindi
S91. Ans.(d)
S92. Ans.(b)
S93. Ans.(d)
S94. Ans.(b)
S95. Ans.(b)
S96. Ans.(d)
S97. Ans.(c)
S98. Ans.(b)
S99. Ans.(a)
S100. Ans.(c)
S101. Ans.(b)
S102. Ans.(c)
S103. Ans.(a)
S104. Ans.(d)
S105. Ans.(a)
S106. Ans.(c)
S107. Ans.(c)
S108. Ans.(c)
S109. Ans.(d)
S110. Ans.(c)
S111. Ans.(b)
S112. Ans.(c)
S113. Ans.(b)
S114. Ans.(a)
S115. Ans.(a)
S116. Ans.(c)
S117. Ans.(b)
S118. Ans.(a)
S119. Ans.(c)
S120. Ans.(b)
50 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com
Language II-English
S121. Ans.(a)
S122. Ans.(b)
S123. Ans.(c)
S124. Ans.(b)
S125. Ans.(a)
S126. Ans.(d)
S127. Ans.(d)
S128. Ans.(d)
S129. Ans.(d)
S130. Ans.(b)
S131. Ans.(a)
S132. Ans.(d)
S133. Ans.(c)
S134. Ans.(a)
S135. Ans.(c)
S136. Ans.(a)
S137. Ans.(b)
S138. Ans.(a)
S139. Ans.(a)
S140. Ans.(b)
S141. Ans.(a)
S142. Ans.(b)
S143. Ans.(d)
S144. Ans.(b)
S145. Ans.(b)
S146. Ans.(c)
S147. Ans.(a)
S148. Ans.(c)
S149. Ans.(d)
S150. Ans.(b) Social Science
S31. Ans.(c)
S32. Ans.(c)
S33. Ans.(d)
S34. Ans.(d)
S35. Ans.(c)
S36. Ans.(a)
S37. Ans.(c)
S38. Ans.(b)
S39. Ans.(c)
S40. Ans.(d)
S41. Ans.(b)
S42. Ans.(a)
S43. Ans.(c)
S44. Ans.(a)
S45. Ans.(a)
S46. Ans.(a)
S47. Ans.(c)
S48. Ans.(b)
S49. Ans.(c)
S50. Ans.(d)
S51. Ans.(a)
S52. Ans.(a)
S53. Ans.(c)
S54. Ans.(a)
S55. Ans.(a)
S56. Ans.(d)
S57. Ans.(c)
S58. Ans.(c)
S59. Ans.(c)
S60. Ans.(c)
S61. Ans.(d)
S62. Ans.(d)
S63. Ans.(b)
S64. Ans.(a)
S65. Ans.(d)
S66. Ans.(c)
S67. Ans.(c)
S68. Ans.(d)
S69. Ans.(c)
S70. Ans.(c)
S71. Ans.(c)
S72. Ans.(d)
S73. Ans.(d)
S74. Ans.(c)
S75. Ans.(a)
S76. Ans.(c)
S77. Ans.(d)
S78. Ans.(c)
S79. Ans.(b)
S80. Ans.(a)
S81. Ans.(b)
S82. Ans.(a)
S83. Ans.(c)
S84. Ans.(c)
S85. Ans.(a)
S86. Ans.(c)
S87. Ans.(c)
S88. Ans.(b)
S89. Ans.(b)
S90. Ans.(a)
51 www.teachersadda.co.in | www.sscadda.com | www.bankersadda.com | www.adda247.com